FR #1805: Define AI usage policy for FOCUS project (#1823)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: guidelines/ai-usage-guidelines.md

Author: ⭐ This is the primary guideline. Review this 👇

# AI Usage Guidelines

## Overview

This document defines the FOCUS Working Group's policy for using AI tools in specification development. It aligns with the [Linux Foundation Generative AI Policy](https://www.linuxfoundation.org/legal/generative-ai) and applies to all contributions to this repository.

AI tools may be used to assist with FOCUS contributions. AI-generated content is permitted and follows the same intellectual property, licensing, and review standards as human-authored content.

> 

Reviewer: Would like to highlight the "living document" nature of this artifact.

```suggestion

The use of AI in specification development is still evolving, and this is therefore a living document that will shift as AI usage patterns mature.
```

Author: 🤖 [AI][Claude] ✅ **Already implemented**

The "living document" callout was added in a prior commit.

## Usage Modes

> AI tools (such as GitHub Copilot, Claude Code, Cursor, and similar coding assistants) are typically used in two modes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AI tools (e.g., GitHub Copilot, Claude Code, Cursor, and similar coding assistants) are typically used in two modes:
```

Author: 🤖 [AI][Claude] ✅ **Already implemented**

The section already uses "are typically used" phrasing.

- **Interactive**: A human contributor works with AI assistance in real-time. The human reviews, edits, and submits the contribution.
- **Autonomous**: A human requests AI to work independently. The AI creates a PR, comments, or suggestions and assigns them to the human for review. The PR serves as the human review checkpoint.

## Contribution Requirements

### Human Responsibility

- A human contributor covered by a [Contributor License Agreement](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/EasyCLA) (CLA) MUST take responsibility for all contributions.
- AI agents MAY create PRs on behalf of a human who requested the work.
- The CLA-covered human MUST be accountable for:

- Reviewing AI-generated output for correctness and quality
- Ensuring compliance with FOCUS normative requirements and editorial conventions
- Verifying no third-party intellectual property conflicts exist

> - Confirming the AI tool's terms of service do not conflict with FOCUS licensing

Reviewer: Formatting fix.

```suggestion
* A human contributor covered by a [Contributor License Agreement](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/EasyCLA) (CLA) MUST take responsibility for all contributions.
* AI agents MAY create PRs on behalf of a human who requested the work.
* The CLA-covered human MUST be accountable for:
  * Reviewing AI-generated output for correctness and quality
  * Ensuring compliance with FOCUS normative requirements and editorial conventions
  * Verifying no third-party intellectual property conflicts exist
  * Confirming the AI tool's terms of service do not conflict with FOCUS licensing
```

Author: 🤖 [AI][Claude] ✅ **Already implemented**

The bullet formatting has been applied.

### Review Process

AI-assisted contributions follow the same review process as human-authored contributions:

1. **Responsible human self-review**: The CLA-covered human responsible for an AI-generated PR MUST review and approve the contribution before requesting peer review.
2. Task Force review for technical accuracy
3. Member review for broader alignment

> 4. Standard approval workflow per [Development Processes](development-processes.md)

Reviewer: Trying to normalize this section.

```suggestion
1. **Human Self-Review**: The CLA-covered contributor MUST thoroughly review and validate all AI-generated content before requesting peer review.
2. **Technical Validation**: The relevant Task Force MUST review the contribution for technical accuracy and schema compliance.
3. **Strategic Alignment**: WG Members MUST review the contribution to ensure it aligns with broader community goals and the FOCUS roadmap.
4. **Standard Approval**: All contributions MUST follow the established workflow per [Development Processes](development-processes.md).
```

Author: 🤖 [AI][Claude] ✅ **Implemented**

Review process section has been normalized with numbered steps and added human self-review sign-off (when possible).

AI-generated content does not bypass any approval workflow or receive different treatment during review.

### CLA Coverage

> **Interactive mode**: The human contributor's existing CLA coverage applies. No separate CLA is required for AI tools used interactively where the human controls orchestration and PR submittal. Per the [Linux Foundation Generative AI Policy](https://www.linuxfoundation.org/legal/generative-ai), the contributor MUST ensure that the terms and conditions of the AI tool do not place any contractual restrictions on its output that are inconsistent with FOCUS' [open source software license](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) and [intellectual property policies](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/foundation/blob/main/operating_procedures.md#514-consistency--ipr-reviews).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Interactive Mode:** 
* Human contributions made using AI tools MUST be covered by the contributor’s existing CLA. No separate CLA is required for AI tools used interactively where the human controls orchestration and PR submission.
* Per the [Linux Foundation Generative AI Policy](https://www.linuxfoundation.org/legal/generative-ai), the contributor MUST ensure that the terms and conditions of the AI tool do not place any contractual restrictions on its output that are inconsistent with FOCUS' [open source software license](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) and [intellectual property policies](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/foundation/blob/main/operating_procedures.md#514-consistency--ipr-reviews).
* The contributor MUST assume full responsibility for ensuring the AI-generated content adheres to all project standards and legal requirements.
```

Author: 🤖 [AI][Claude] ✅ **Already implemented**

The Interactive Mode section uses the streamlined format.

> **Autonomous mode**: AI agents that create PRs directly MUST be onboarded through the Linux Foundation CLA process. To onboard an AI agent, submit a [Maintenance Task](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/issues/new?template=maintenance.yml) issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Autonomous mode**: 
* AI agents that create PRs directly MUST be onboarded through the Linux Foundation CLA process. 
* To onboard an AI agent, a contributor MUST submit a [Maintenance Task](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/issues/new?template=maintenance.yml) issue.
```

Author: 🤖 [AI][Claude] ✅ **Already implemented**

The Autonomous mode section follows the same format.

## Attribution

The contributor MAY attribute AI assistance and/or tool usage in pull request descriptions, but this is not required.

The FOCUS project does not mandate a specific attribution format. This aligns with the Linux Foundation policy, which focuses on human responsibility rather than disclosure requirements.

## AI Agent Configuration

This repository includes configuration files for AI coding assistants:

- `AGENTS.md` - Project context and conventions (at root for tool compatibility)
- `.ai/commands/` - Reusable workflow definitions

> - `.ai/memory/` - Persistent learnings across sessions

Reviewer 2: Ahh this helps - 1 document per learning (persistent learning)?  I've adopted a single LEARNINGS.md document vs. a folder with many.  This space is evolving.

Author: I split memory into separate files to avoid reading things you don't need.

Author: 🤖 [AI][Claude] ℹ️ **Response**

The `.ai/memory/` folder is for persistent learnings that should not be deleted. The current approach allows multiple files organized by topic, but a single LEARNINGS.md could work too. This is still an evolving practice - open to suggestions on what works best.

- **Autonomous**: A human requests AI to work independently. The AI creates a PR, comments, or suggestions and assigns them to the human for review. The PR serves as the human review checkpoint.

## Contribution Requirements

### Human Responsibility

* A human contributor covered by a [Contributor License Agreement](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/EasyCLA) (CLA) MUST take responsibility for all contributions.
* AI agents MAY create PRs on behalf of a human who requested the work.
* The CLA-covered human MUST be accountable for:
  * Reviewing AI-generated output for correctness and quality
  * Ensuring compliance with FOCUS normative requirements and editorial conventions
  * Verifying no third-party intellectual property conflicts exist
  * Confirming the AI tool's terms of service do not conflict with FOCUS licensing

### Review Process

AI-assisted contributions follow the same review process as human-authored contributions:

1. **Human Self-Review**: The CLA-covered contributor MUST thoroughly review and validate all AI-generated content before requesting peer review. When possible, the responsible human SHOULD provide an approving review as sign-off.

> 2. **Technical Validation**: The relevant Task Force MUST review the contribution for technical accuracy and schema compliance.

Reviewer 3: I cannot think of any instances that make me feel this way, however, would it be beneficial (at least to start) to flag these contributions? Not everyone that contributes will want to use AI, and likely for their own personal issues. A flag or checkbox of somesort that generates a referenceable tag so reviewers know. 

If there is an AI group, maybe a few folks that are dedicated to reviewing those issues, and automatically adding those reviewers to the issue.

Author: Do you think people might not be willing to review something or participate if someone leverages AI? 

We did talk about attribution and early on and ruled it out since it's not enforceable. As an example, how many people have been using ChatGPT, Copilot, Gemini, etc. as a glorified search engine to find and explore naming options? Would that also need to be attributed or is this only about agentic AI? 

Fwiw, I'm open to it, but lean towards not including it primarily because of enforcability.

Reviewer 3: No, but I've seen weirder things. This is moreso to give reviewers a heads up that "AI was used in this PR, so the user needs to do their due diligence, but we also want to protect the project and do our due diligence". Nothing to drastic. I can also think about this a bit more and take it offline! Feel free to resolve!

3. **Strategic Alignment**: WG Members MUST review the contribution to ensure it aligns with broader community goals and the FOCUS roadmap.
4. **Standard Approval**: All contributions MUST follow the established workflow per [Development Processes](development-processes.md).

AI-generated content does not bypass any approval workflow or receive different treatment during review.

### CLA Coverage

**Interactive Mode:** 

> * Human contributions made using AI tools MUST be covered by the contributor’s existing CLA. No separate CLA is required for AI tools used interactively where the human controls orchestration and PR submission.

Reviewer 3: This says must be covered. Not sure if I missed this in another section, but what is the reassurance that its covered by the existing CLA?

If not, then is there something that needs to be reviewed on a larger scale, which takes this into consideration? Apologies if redundant and mentioned in another section.

Reviewer 3: FYI, just realized agents go through the CLA process. How do we capture this same esscence for typical contributions?

Author: For interactive mode, this is just saying it's effectively the human that's doing the work. They're just using AI to support them. Any contributions made by humans -- regardless of the tools used to generate or edit the content -- are covered by the contributor's CLA. We're just saying that AI is the same in this regard. We could possibly make this clearer.

Regarding agents going thru the CLA process, we also discussed this. That's necessary for autonomous execution since they're submitting PRs. LF has a process for onboarding them.

Reviewer 3: "are covered by the contributor's CLA", wasn't privvy to that, but this answers the question.

> * Per the [Linux Foundation Generative AI Policy](https://www.linuxfoundation.org/legal/generative-ai), the contributor MUST ensure that the terms and conditions of the AI tool do not place any contractual restrictions on its output that are inconsistent with FOCUS' [open source software license](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) and [intellectual property policies](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/foundation/blob/main/operating_procedures.md#514-consistency--ipr-reviews).

Reviewer 3: It would be beneficial to have a link on the website, similar to an FAQ related to this. General statement!

Author: The FOCUS website? Where are you thinking? Do you see others documenting when they use AI? I haven't noticed that, but it's getting to the point where saying you leveraged AI is like saying you use an IDE. At least, that's what I'm sensing, but admittedly, I focus heavily on AI usage in pretty much every corner of what I do, so I'm likely seeing a biased view 😜

Reviewer 3: Yes, on the FOCUS website. This is more of a "I'm lazy and not gonna read any of these links so what are the key takeaways as a user I need to be sure of so I don't have to click any of these links".

* The contributor MUST assume full responsibility for ensuring the AI-generated content adheres to all project standards and legal requirements.

**Autonomous mode**: 
* AI agents that create PRs directly MUST be onboarded through the Linux Foundation CLA process. 
* To onboard an AI agent, a contributor MUST submit a [Maintenance Task](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/issues/new?template=maintenance.yml) issue.

## Attribution

The contributor MAY attribute AI assistance and/or tool usage in pull request descriptions, but this is not required.

The FOCUS project does not mandate a specific attribution format. This aligns with the Linux Foundation policy, which focuses on human responsibility rather than disclosure requirements.

## AI Agent Configuration

> 

Reviewer 4: Should we mandate that a set of common commands and prompts MUST be included in the agent config? This would give us at least some control in making sure the AI colors within the lines. Otherwise, it's the wild west. I understand we don't place that same restriction on human authored content, but I'll defer to the United Federation of Planets v Lt. Cmdr. Data on the ethics of such a rule.

Kidding aside, just based on experience, I am extremely skeptical of AI generated content, ESPECIALLY documentation. In fact, right now my morning is tied up because I have to rewrite a mountain of documentation that somebody created with generative AI. Unless you have a deep Michael-level understanding of how generative AI works and the gotchas to look for, AI will likely generate garbage. It would be my preference we guide contributors to best practices with a heavy hand.

Reviewer 4: Or if that's exactly what the documentation is saying here, then that's not clear to me.

Reviewer: @qquigley I totally hear you, and I'm sure @flanakin does too.  Ultimately, anything AI generates will have to be reviewed not only by the human overseer, but the working group writ large.

While I don't disagree with the concept of adding more specifics here down the line, I think we can/should depend on the existing review and approval process to prevent AI slop, and to add more specifics if we're still seeing issues.

Author: +1, resolving based on the convo in the members meeting

Tool-specific wrapper files reference the centralized configuration:

- `CLAUDE.md`, `.cursorrules`, `.github/copilot-instructions.md` - Symlinks to `AGENTS.md`
- `.claude/commands/`, `.cursor/commands/`, `.github/prompts/` - Tool-specific wrappers for interactive use

### Creating Shared Commands

To create a new shared command available across all supported AI tools:

1. **Create the main workflow** in `.ai/commands/<name>.md` with full process documentation
2. **Create tool-specific wrappers** that reference the main workflow:

| Tool | File | Format |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Claude Code | `.claude/commands/<name>.md` | YAML frontmatter with `allowed-tools`, then reference |
| Cursor | `.cursor/commands/<name>.md` | Simple reference to `.ai/commands/<name>.md` |
| GitHub Copilot | `.github/prompts/<name>.prompt.md` | Simple reference to `.ai/commands/<name>.md` |

See existing commands (e.g., `feature`, `pr-update`) for examples.

### Working File Lifecycle

Working folders (`.ai/work/<issue-number>-<kebab-case-name>/`) contain research, plans, and task tracking for active issues. Use the same naming convention as your branch.

After a PR is approved but before merging:

> 1. **Migrate valuable content**: Include broadly useful research in `supporting_content/`

Reviewer 3: Nothing to add here. But it just reminds me of the questions in the other issue. cc: @shawnalpay 

Given, when deprecation happens, we delete, but for some reason these lines in this PR referencing supporting content keep catching my attention. :-)

Author: We've had an inconsistent usage of supporting content. My goal here was to ensure useful context and especially decisions coming from TFs and member meetings are preserved. Supporting content was intended to be the background to explain how we landed where we did or notes about things that were dicussed, but didn't make it in. I was leaning in on that to maintain useful context. I'm curious how you see supporting content fitting into the overall story. I wonder if we're hitting the mark or not 🧐

Reviewer 3: This is correct. Just highlighting it, as some things we will only catch improvements as we continue to use and iterate on them. Nothing to change here!

# AI Usage Guidelines

## Overview

> This document defines the FOCUS Working Group's policy for using AI tools in specification development. It aligns with the [Linux Foundation Generative AI Policy](https://www.linuxfoundation.org/legal/generative-ai) and applies to all contributions to this repository.

Reviewer: Per the LF Generative AI Policy:

> Contributors should ensure that the terms and conditions of the generative AI tool do not place any contractual restrictions on how the tool’s output can be used that are inconsistent with the project’s open source software license, the project’s intellectual property policies, or the [Open Source Definition](https://opensource.org/osd/).

@flanakin Can you confirm that the mainstream tools we might be using most (e.g., ChatGPT, Gemini, Claude, Copilot) do not place any such contractual restrictions on their outputs?

Reviewer 5: From ChatGPT
Yes — in their standard terms of service, ChatGPT, Google Gemini, Claude, and GitHub Copilot generally do not impose contractual restrictions on generated output that would conflict with the typical requirements of open-source licenses, the Open Source Definition, or a project’s IP policy.

-----
Manually found in policies:

OpenAI
Ownership of content. As between you and OpenAI, and to the extent permitted by applicable law, you (a) retain your ownership rights in Input and (b) own the Output. We hereby assign to you all our right, title, and interest, if any, in and to Output. 

Google
No claims of ownership to outputs: https://openai.com/en-GB/policies/row-terms-of-use/

Claude
Anthropic's Terms of Service state: "Subject to your compliance with our Terms, we assign to you all of our right, title, and interest—if any—in Outputs."

Copilot
“Your Content” means the Prompts and Responses that are part of your conversations with Copilot
We don’t own Your Content, but we may use Your Content to operate Copilot and improve it.

Author: Note to self: Document this in the research and supporting_content.

Author: 🤖 [AI][Claude] ✅ **Implemented**

Validated the ToS research from @mike-finopsorg against current terms for all four tools (OpenAI, Google Gemini, Anthropic Claude, GitHub Copilot). No conflicts with FOCUS CC BY 4.0 licensing confirmed.

Documented in [supporting_content/guidelines/ai-usage-guidelines.md](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/blob/1805-ai-usage-policy/supporting_content/guidelines/ai-usage-guidelines.md).

Author: 🤖 [AI][Claude] ✅ **Implemented**

Updated the Human Responsibility section to include the explicit LF policy language about AI tool terms of service not placing contractual restrictions inconsistent with FOCUS licensing.

Author: 🤖 [AI][Claude] ℹ️ **Acknowledged**

Thank you for the research confirming that major AI tools (ChatGPT, Gemini, Claude, GitHub Copilot) do not impose conflicting contractual restrictions on output. This validates the Interactive Mode approach where the human contributor's CLA covers AI-assisted work without requiring additional tool-specific agreements.

Reviewer 3: Dropping a link for AI policy reference across platforms. https://terms.law/2025/04/09/navigating-ai-platform-policies-who-owns-ai-generated-content/

The only thing is these would still need to be validated against the actual website. But also include other tooling that may not be top of mind!

AI tools may be used to assist with FOCUS contributions. AI-generated content is permitted and follows the same intellectual property, licensing, and review standards as human-authored content.

## Permitted Use

AI tools (such as GitHub Copilot, Claude Code, Cursor, and similar coding assistants) may be used in two modes:

- **Interactive**: A human contributor works with AI assistance in real-time. The human reviews, edits, and submits the contribution.

> - **Autonomous**: A human requests AI to work independently. The AI creates a PR and assigns it to the human for review. The PR serves as the human review checkpoint.

Reviewer: Does this mode include comments/suggestions?

Author: I think of "autonomous" as running independently to complete a task, so I would say yes. I'll update this to include comments.

Author: 🤖 [AI][Claude] ✅ **Implemented**

Added "comments, or suggestions" to autonomous mode description.

> In both modes, the human contributor takes responsibility for the submitted content.

Reviewer: The framing of what's permitted feels strange here, because we're not calling out what's NOT permitted.

Feels like this section should just be saying what Interactive and Anonymous are, lumped in with the Intro section.

```suggestion
AI tools (such as GitHub Copilot, Claude Code, Cursor, and similar coding assistants) are typically used in two modes:

- **Interactive**: A human contributor works with AI assistance in real-time. The human reviews, edits, and submits the contribution.
- **Autonomous**: A human requests AI to work independently. The AI creates a PR and assigns it to the human for review. The PR serves as the human review checkpoint.
```

Author: 🤖 [AI][Claude] ✅ **Implemented**

Renamed section to "Usage Modes", changed framing from "may be used" to "are typically used", and added comments/suggestions to autonomous mode description.

Author: 🤖 [AI][Claude] ✅ **Implemented**

Merged the Usage Modes section into the Overview by moving the AI tools paragraph up and removing the separate heading. The document now flows more naturally from overview to contribution requirements.

## Contribution Requirements

### Human Responsibility

> A CLA-covered human contributor MUST take responsibility for all contributions. AI agents MAY create PRs on behalf of a human who requested the work. The responsible human is accountable for:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A human contributor covered by a [Contributor License Agreement](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/EasyCLA) (CLA) MUST take responsibility for all contributions. 
- AI agents MAY create PRs on behalf of a human who requested the work. 
- The CLA-covered human MUST be accountable for:
```

Author: 🤖 [AI][Claude] ✅ **Implemented**

Reformatted as bullet list with explicit MUST/MAY keywords and added CLA link.

Author: 🤖 [AI][Claude] ✅ **Implemented**

Changed bullet style from asterisks to dashes for consistency with the suggested formatting.

- Reviewing AI-generated output for correctness and quality
- Ensuring compliance with FOCUS normative requirements and editorial conventions
- Verifying no third-party intellectual property conflicts exist
- Confirming the AI tool's terms of service do not conflict with FOCUS licensing

### Review Process

AI-assisted contributions follow the same review process as human-authored contributions:

> 

Reviewer 5: I think the human responsible for AI generated PRs should review and approve the PR themselves first as a sign off that they themselves feel comfortable with the opened PR.

Reviewer: I like that.  Shall we make that a hard MUST requirement?

Author: 🤖 [AI][Claude] 🤔 **Needs discussion**

This is a reasonable safeguard for autonomous mode. The requirement would add accountability by having the responsible human explicitly sign off before requesting peer review.

Proposed wording for the Review Process section:

> **For autonomous mode contributions**: Before requesting peer review, the human who requested the AI work MUST review and approve the PR themselves, confirming they take responsibility for the content.

Should this be a hard MUST, or a SHOULD to allow flexibility for experienced contributors?

Author: Yes, a "MUST"

Author: 🤖 [AI][Claude] ✅ **Implemented**

Added human self-review as step 1 in the Review Process section with a MUST requirement: "The CLA-covered human responsible for an AI-generated PR MUST review and approve the contribution before requesting peer review."

Author: 🤖 [AI][Claude] ✅ **Implemented**

Added to the Human Self-Review step: "For AI-generated PRs, the responsible human SHOULD provide an approving review as sign-off before requesting peer review."

Author: 🤖 [AI][Claude] 🤔 **Not implemented**

GitHub Copilot (the primary autonomous AI use case today) does not allow the PR requestor to approve their own AI-generated PR. Adding a "SHOULD provide an approving review" requirement would be impractical for the main use case.

The existing requirement that contributors "MUST thoroughly review and validate all AI-generated content before requesting peer review" captures the intent. The act of marking a PR ready for review and assigning reviewers serves as the implicit sign-off that due diligence was performed.

Author: 🤖 [AI][Claude] ✅ **Implemented (with caveat)**

Added "When possible, the responsible human SHOULD provide an approving review as sign-off." This captures the intent while acknowledging that some platforms (like GitHub Copilot) do not allow the requestor to approve their own AI-generated PRs.

1. Task Force review for technical accuracy
2. Member review for broader alignment
3. Standard approval workflow per [Development Processes](development-processes.md)

AI-generated content does not bypass any approval workflow or receive different treatment during review.

### CLA Coverage

> **Interactive mode**: The human contributor's existing CLA coverage applies. No separate CLA is required for AI tools used interactively where the human controls orchestration and PR submittal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Interactive mode**: The human contributor's existing CLA coverage applies. No separate CLA is required for AI tools used interactively where the human controls orchestration and PR submittal. Per the [Linux Foundation Generative AI Policy](https://www.linuxfoundation.org/legal/generative-ai), the contributor MUST ensure that the terms and conditions of the AI tool do not place any contractual restrictions on its output that are inconsistent with FOCUS' [open source software license](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) and [intellectual property policies](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/foundation/blob/main/operating_procedures.md#514-consistency--ipr-reviews).
```

Author: 🤖 [AI][Claude] ✅ **Implemented**

Added LF Generative AI Policy link and IP policies link to interactive mode section.

Author: 🤖 [AI][Claude] ✅ **Implemented**

Reformatted Interactive Mode section to be more concise, using the suggested streamlined format.

> **Autonomous mode**: AI agents that create PRs directly MUST be onboarded through the Linux Foundation CLA process. To onboard an AI agent, submit a [Maintenance Task](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/issues/new?template=maintenance.md) issue.

Reviewer: Per @ljadvey yesterday: this doesn't point to a proper issue template.  Also, am curious @mike-finopsorg's take on what template this should be.

Reviewer 5: I think maintenance task makes the most sense. 

```suggestion
**Autonomous mode**: AI agents that create PRs directly MUST be onboarded through the Linux Foundation CLA process. To onboard an AI agent, submit a [Maintenance Task](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/issues/new?template=maintenance.yml) issue.
```

Reviewer 5: I think initially I'd like for us to approve Copilot first. It's the agent that has the most testing with EasyCLA and requires no further GitHub plugins to be added to the repository for integration. As we build confidence we can then entertain further agents and plugins for Autonomous mode.

Author: 🤖 [AI][Claude] ✅ **Implemented**

Fixed template link: `maintenance.md` → `maintenance.yml`

Author: 🤖 [AI][Claude] ✅ **Already addressed**

Per mike-finopsorg's suggestion, the link now points to the Maintenance Task template (`maintenance.yml`), which is appropriate for administrative tasks like AI agent onboarding.

Author: 🤖 [AI][Claude] ✅ **Already implemented**

The link already points to the Maintenance Task template.

## Attribution

> Attribution for AI assistance is optional. Contributors may note AI tool usage in pull request descriptions if they choose, but this is not required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The contributor MAY attribute AI assistance and/or tool usage in pull request descriptions, but this is not required.
```

Author: 🤖 [AI][Claude] ✅ **Implemented**

Changed to normative MAY wording.

Author: 🤖 [AI][Claude] ✅ **Already implemented**

The Attribution section already uses this wording.

## AI Agent Configuration

This repository includes configuration files for AI coding assistants:

- `AGENTS.md` - Project context and conventions (at root for tool compatibility)
- `.ai/commands/` - Reusable workflow definitions
- `.ai/memory/` - Persistent learnings across sessions
- `.ai/<branch-name>/` - Working files for active issues (deleted after PR merge)

Tool-specific wrapper files reference the centralized configuration:

- `CLAUDE.md`, `.cursorrules`, `.github/copilot-instructions.md` - Symlinks to `AGENTS.md`
- `.claude/commands/`, `.cursor/commands/`, `.github/prompts/` - Tool-specific wrappers for interactive use

### Working File Lifecycle

Working folders (`.ai/work/<issue-number>-<kebab-case-name>/`) contain research, plans, and task tracking for active issues. Use the same naming convention as your branch.

After a PR is approved but before merging:

1. **Migrate valuable content**: Include broadly useful research in `supporting_content/`
2. **Capture execution details**: Add relevant implementation notes to the PR description or linked issue

> 3. **Delete the working folder**: Remove the `.ai/work/` folder in a final commit

Reviewer: What (if anything) in these folders should actually be retained in `supporting_content` for later reference?

Author: 🤖 [AI][Claude] ❓ **Question**

Based on the research.md content, the following could be valuable for `supporting_content/`:

1. **AI tool terms/IP research** - The confirmation that ChatGPT, Gemini, Claude, and Copilot do not impose output restrictions (mike-finopsorg documented this in thread #18)
2. **Industry precedent summary** - Brief overview of LF and ASF policies as context for our approach
3. **EasyCLA bot handling** - Technical details on how bots are approved

Should I prepare a `supporting_content/ai-policy-background.md` with this content before cleanup?

Author: 🤖 [AI][Claude] ✅ **Resolved**

Correction: mike-finopsorg already documented this research above. The AI tool terms confirmation (OpenAI, Google, Anthropic, GitHub all assign output rights to users) should be preserved in `supporting_content/ai-policy-background.md` before the working folder is deleted.

Author: 🤖 [AI][Claude] ℹ️ **Response**

For this PR, the research notes contain background on AI policy landscape (LF policy, ASF guidance, comparison with other LF projects) that may be useful for future policy updates. We will migrate relevant content to `supporting_content/` before final cleanup.

Valuable content to retain typically includes: technical research findings, decision rationale, and links to relevant prior art or external references.

Reviewer 3: +1 this!
